okay hello math fans I hope this is
working
two minutes unless anyone writes being a
very let's say angry comment saying we
can't hear what we can't see you say
thank very much for tuning in my first
ever time doing something live so we'll
see how it goes
the idea here is on Monday we released
the first Tom Knox mass appeal video
looking at GCSE maths and we were
talking about cengiz decimals and
fractions so the main purpose of the
line is for everyone hopefully take part
and give me questions east around the
topic that we were discussing in the
video on so though I will take other
maths questions as I see fit we'll see
but I'm gonna start with some based
around sentences decimals and fractions
so I've had quite a few sent in
beforehand so I'm gonna work through a
few of those to kick things off and
whilst people are still joining and I
guess we're all sort of getting used to
how this whole folks at least I'll be
getting used to how this whole thing
works and so I'll start off by answering
some of the questions sent in and then
we'll move on to if you have any
questions during that just type away in
the chat box I can see the chat box and
if I open on my computer so hopefully
I'll be able to like respond and we can
still take my own bit of discussion I've
no idea how long she's gonna last till I
run out of questions so I get bored till
we all get bored who knows but so the
first question I want to look at and
what somebody how do I know who sent me
this let me have a look so this one is
from Sarah who is in northwich so hello
Sarah at Norwich I don't know if you'll
watch it got up hopefully you are so you
something your question we say we said
how do you convert a recurring decimal
into a fraction so I need I need a
recurring decimal does anyone want to
give me a recurring decimal so this is
anyone want to type a recurring decimal
into the chatbox that would be great
otherwise I will just make one up off
the top of my head and then go with it
and waiting for a few more seconds
otherwise I ain't going to make one up
okay-y oh no oh we've got one great yes
okay 1 2 3
watching TV 23 we're going at that 1 1 1
was very good chat and preciate the joke
right so we've got let's go ignore point
1 2 3 1 2 3 on TV this is going to go
forever so you can think of this as not
point 1 2 3
recurring now it's turn this into a
fraction
the trick is basically we have to get
rid of this infinite expansion so this
is the dot dot dot here is telling you
that this is going forever and this will
just continue indefinitely and we can't
really deal with that infinite nurse in
its current form so the trick here is
all these can you create something
that's similar to this number we're
still with an infinite decimal expansion
and then take them away from each other
so to do that given here we have 3
places which repeats so this is 3
replacing places what we do is we
multiply by 10 to the power 3 so and if
this was n places that were repeated so
5 or 6 whatever any value would end and
you would multiply by 10 to the N so
here it's 3 so you multiply by a
thousand 10 to the 3 and that shifts
everything three places you get 123 1 2
3 and now we've got another infinite
decimal expansion another recurring
decimal recurring number but it's the
same as the one above past the decimal
point so this is where you say well if I
call this one X then this one is now a
hundred hang on so if this is X and this
one was a thousand X wasn't it we
multiply by a thousand it's equal to
this so if I subtract X from thousand X
I'll get 900
see 9x equals 123 points one two three
one two three one two three - no point
one two three one two three one two and
three is going to get rid of the decimal
place so this is now equal 223 and so X
which was our original decimal is now
just 999 that might be you might be able
to simplify that I don't think you can
simplify that there's 123 how many
factors that's the question people maybe
we can simplify that I don't think we
can but maybe you can but either way
we've now turned our recurring infinite
decimal into a fraction okay right so
that was the first question thank you
Sarah setting that one in now another
one that I really liked you just check
here this one is ah someone has told me
we can divide by 3 so we've got 41 yes
very nice so divide 123 by 3
yeah very nicely I in my head I did
think maybe we could divide by 3 because
this you definitely can divide by 3 but
some reason I decided you couldn't
divide that by 3 this is what happens
when you do things like so yeah you're
right very good so that will actually be
183 and I it's definitely the simplest
fraction because this is prime number I
want to say yes I want to say 41 as a
prime number
I'm not thinking if 41 isn't the prime
number I'm sure someone can tell me I'm
pretty sure it is so we're going with
this being the simplest fraction but we
didn't have to do that we could have
just left it here and we still got rid
of this infinite recurring decimal as
Franky okay so the second question that
I wanted to talk about is really nice
question so this was from Matt who is in
Bournemouth also in the UK hello Matt
thank you for your question and so this
is asking about percentages and
repeating a percentage increase for
so this is actually a really really
interesting question it sounds it sounds
quite innocent at the beginning more
reason to be straight forwards and then
it gets very very sort of in-depth
already so I got very in-depth it so max
question was what happens if you
increase the number by 10% forever
crease by 10% forever
so again and again and again so you
start with some number you increase it
by temp step then you increase by
another 10 percent then another 10
percent and no temp set and you just
keep going and going again right so what
we're going to do here odds a bit what
and is we're going to start with our
number being X ok so this is our number
that we're going to increase by 10
percent again and again and again so
when we increase it by 10 percent once
what we're doing is adding nor pointone
lots of X onto it which will give us one
point one lots of X so that's after one
iteration of increasing by time so now
if we do this again we're going to then
have one point 1 X plus 1 X no it's not
going to be X there is it's going to be
plus not put one times one point one X
which is going to be one point 2 1 X I
think sure you can all check my mental
rithmetic so now so we're seeing that we
started with the X then we got one put 1
lots of X then we have one for two one
lots of X and this is going to continue
but we can actually hopefully spot a
little bit of a pattern about what's
going on here
so this is one point one times X now
this number looks very much like 11
times 11 squared times our original
number X so if we are to just continue
this forever we're just going to get the
next stage would then go to 1.1 cubed
times X and 1 point warms and 4 times X
etc etc so we end up with 1 point 1 to
the power n X after n steps right now
the next question is to wonder about
what does this actually equal so we have
a formula here which tells us the value
of x after n increases of 10% so what we
want to think about is could this go to
infinity could this keep growing forever
and ever or could this go down to zero
gonna keep shrinking and what's going to
determine that is going to be the value
of X so as a simple case if we
considered X to be 1 for example so take
an easy case if X is equal to 1 then
this is just 1 point 1 times n amounts
or so that's actually going to go to
bility tend to infinity because it's
just going to keep increasing forever
and ever ever and you can try this you
can do a plot of the graph if you plot I
think I did plot this let me just think
about what it looked like yes so if you
plot the graph of y equals
one point ^ x basically zero it
looks like that it's an exponential
graph which we're seeing a lot at the
moment right as all this discussion of
exponential graphs with diseases and
what not so you have this exponential
graph for one point 1 to the X so it
does when it's just up here now but over
here we're considering different values
of x and then letting em go to infinity
as we repeat this percentage increase so
if I now take X for example to be what
could I take this to be now what if I
took it to be 1/2 for example then that
will still actually will that be ok whoo
it's going to depend on whether X is
taken to many powers hmm so how did I do
this before okay well let me go back a
second so I've got I've managed to get a
different formula when I was thinking
about this before again classic doing
this like so much easier pre recording
videos alright so I agree with this on K
1 X plus that amount of X is definitely
that a but what can we do here is we can
say okay so well
by let's try something a little bit
different so if we have X plus that so
this is now so this is our starting
value and then we're going to add on 10%
of X which is the same as adding on 1/10
right so 10% is equal 1 is equal to 1/2
so sensitive decimals fractions so here
we have this number and then what we
want to do is repeat this several times
I think that's actually what we want to
do is now so if I just repeat this once
ok let's do this this is more
interesting let's look at this one so
this is kind of like compound interest
so let's consider this formula instead
so now what we can do is the same thing
we can take the x factor outside bracket
and we have X to the n times one point 1
to the N so slightly different to what I
have before I'm missing this M up here
so I'm not quite sure what I did before
but anyway as I said we're going to go
with this version and this version is
way more interesting and lets me talk
about my favorite number as we'll see so
we've got X plus X over 10 all to the
power n so we take out the factor of the
X so you can just break that down we're
really saying is this is X 1 plus 1/10
all to the power n so now this n will go
on this bracket and this bracket
separately and so you get this now we
know that if X is 1 then this is just 1
point 1 to the N and we know over here
this goes to infinity but now if X is
1/2
what we
here is you've got this thing which will
go to infinity I've shown on our graph
but then we've got 1/2 to the power n so
if you plot the graph of a so they make
that one and then this is gonna be to
the N so if we plot the graph of 1/2 to
increasingly large powers what you see
is it gets smaller and smaller and
smaller so 1/2 squared gives you 1 over
4 1/4 1/2 cubed gives you 1 8 5 2 power
4 1/16 they're getting smaller as well
as Wallace you're basically decreasing
away something like that so we've got
one term here or this one point 1 this
term wants to go to infinity and this
term wants to go to zero so then the
question is who's going to win in that
race you've got one thing one terms
trying to make things really big and the
other terms making things really small
and we want to know you know just the
big one when do we get to infinity or
does the small one when do we go to zero
or are they kind of the same and maybe
we get some finite value in the middle
we don't really know at this point so
what we can do is you can start playing
around with different values so the one
that if we plug in 1/2 for example so we
go back to this formula here and plug in
1/2 so if X is 1/2 in this one we've got
1/2 plus 1/2 divided by 10 so that's 1
xx all to the power n now 1/2 + 1 xx is
going to be 11 out of 20 20 to the power
n and this will definitely go to 0
because this is less than so this is
less than 1 so as you take this number
fraction to larger and larger powers
it's just kind of the same as the half
graph it decrease isn't going to zero so
this one goes to zero okay so a half
goes to zero right right so anyone want
to give me another number to try type
type a number between zero and one in
the chat box that might be an
interesting one to look at ideally
bigger than 1/2 because we know that 1/2
right I've got 3/4
thank you very much seal great name
right so 3/4 so let's do a similar
calculations what we get here with the
number 3 courses not this Empire so this
one is going to give us three quarters
plus 1/10 of that 340 so that's 30 40 to
the end so that's going to give me 33
out of 40 cm this is less than 1 this
will now go to 0 right so this
disappears
okay fifty one to forty goes to zero
okay since we call let's go to zero
right well so we got no place through
here occurring good one 1011 so let's go
1011 so it's less than one and it's
bigger than 3/4 so 10 11th in this
formula here so we've got 10 out of 11
Plus 10 2 and so that gives us 1 to the
power n so that goes to 1
nice place Island right so ten lemons
gonna go into one if we plug that one
into our formula so that is going to be
the decisive number really isn't it the
ten eleven so if we've got something
that is so what can we say we had this
formula so we can say over here
that let's do this in pink this goes to
infinity it X is greater than ten lemons
and it goes to zero if X is less than
and it is one right so that finally
gives us an answer to the question so we
were looking at what happens if you
increase a number by ten percent forever
we got this formula here which is super
helpful we consider some different
values to figure out what was going on
sometimes we went to infinity sometimes
we went to zero and then we found or
Simon found that when we have 10 11s we
get to one and so anything below that
will go to zero
anything above that will go to infinity
okay right so staying on this particular
topic
you just
I have a question for all of you we're
going to play it so the make-believe
game show right so you know as I said
we're gonna play a make-believe game
show which is going to have the
following prizes on offer so option a
you can take a prize of three pounds
option B you can take a prize of one
pound plus 1/12 interest every month you
can have option C which is going to be
one pound plus 150 second interest every
week or option D you can have one pound
with one 365th interest every day and
the question is which option do you
select ok so I'll give you state
obviously you can just plug these into a
calculator but that's no fun so let's
not do that
ok let's think about just looking at
this tiger answer in the chat box a B C
or D what would you take and we'll see
what everyone comes up with
okay
so we've got two two votes with D so far
right I chose to child
tallies on there I'll give you another
few more seconds if anyone else wants to
vote another vote for deep okay
another two votes for D okay apparently
we're all going deep okay so just see
them again D which is fine right you can
do it you are in this situations so
we've got our we go some other boats now
right okay I like these last sex and got
some different boats
we got another it got D in the long run
and a in the short term okay interesting
so we've got like let's call that half a
vote for a and like another half of open
D and then we've got a and B okay as
well on their own on that okay so and
basically want to know which one of
these is larger so which is the amount
of money you're going to get and we can
do this using a formula very similar to
the one that we've just had and we were
working through the the percentage
question which is why this is linked so
three pounds will always be three pounds
forever
right so that doesn't change so that is
the final value we'll get there is three
parts
now one plus one twelve and then getting
paid that interest every month
I just realized well this is only for
four year I just realized I probably
yeah okay why I've actually incorrectly
defined the problem we now have a new
problem which is you're only getting
this for a year
okay so we're gonna have to vote again
and decide now that I've actually given
you the correct problem so now I see why
somebody was saying
one day in the short-term and D in the
long term okay so the idea is this is
only going to happen for a year I'm not
going to keep giving you interest
forever because then the number would
increase forever and ever and be a lot
more than three pounds so the idea is do
you take option a B C or D so whereas
for a time period of a year so after a
year without today you will definitely
have three pounds after a year with
option B you will have some amount which
we can work out same for C saying for D
but just to start with I want to know
what people think right so I've got one
mo for a and one vote for D another vote
for doing okay maybe it's not changing
your thinking but either way I just
wanted to make sure I did to find the
problem correctly to allow us to wear
this out okay another vote for D both a
okay right so if we try and work out the
all of them in the stay well that's an
interesting upset okay so we've got a
lot of them what option represented by a
square bracket nice okay so it seems to
be split between a and E which is good
but it shows that I think some of you
have got a feel for what's happening
here so we're going to try and work out
the amount we will end up with for all
of them and then see which one would
actually been the best choice so so a is
obviously going to be three pounds it's
not going to change you get the three
pounds done there's no interest now for
option B what we can think about is sort
of writing out a formula for what's
happening so this is compound interest
as I said it's very similar to what we
looked at with the percentages problem
last time so what we've got here is one
plus one 12 and what we're doing is
we're taking this to the power 12 so
we're starting with one pound
well ending on a 12 and then we're doing
that 12 times because we're doing it
every month for a year so this
is going you can work this out now we
have fixed numbers you can plug this
into your calculator which I did earlier
and you get to pound 61 okay so we
definitely don't want option B so I
don't think anyone voted for B even
people coming in a bit late did not vote
for B so well done for not voting for B
it's between definitely less than the
three parts now for C is going to be
very very similar right so they've got
the same formula but now it's one plus
one over 52 and we're doing this every
week so we're doing this 52 times over
the course of the year so that's going
to give us plugging that into your
calculator you get two point seven one
okay so maybe write these I'll rewrite
these underneath so this a bit clearer
so a usually three pounds
B gives you two pound 61 C gives you two
powers 71 right so there's some kind of
a pattern between B and C so what's
happening between B and C is we're
getting paid a smaller amount of
interest but it's happening more often
so again it's like the problem we
discussed last time where we had one
term growing to infinity and one term
that was going to zero
and we were trying to find out what's
the balance between those two terms to
give us the answer so the same thing is
kind of happening here so we make the
payments more often but the amount you
get paid is a little bit less each time
the interest so what you're seeing an
increase overall so then you might
wonder what Part D does the same pass
and continue do we continue to get more
and more and like our total being larger
by paying a small amount of interest
only being one over 365 but
now it's been paid for in 65 times and
when you plug Part D into your
calculator which will be the formula RT
will be 1 plus 1 over 3 to the power of
365 you get 2 pounds 17 one so it
doesn't increase the most you can win is
2 pounds and 71 pence so the actual
answer is definitely a so well done to
these three people who voted for anyone
else to who I can see the lots of other
ages have appeared so well done for
anyone who works out that it was going
to be number eight so what's actually
going on here
and this links into my favorite number
which is touching on my arm here is
we're calculating the number E to more
and more accuracy so some of you I think
spotted this somebody very cleverly said
I might are they allowed to both auction
be Tom Mullen Tom for spotting the
answer was actually so what's happening
if you look at the terms in blue the
different formulas that we've got all
you're doing here is basically saying we
have 1 plus 1 over N to the power n so
this is what we have in each case we're
in Part B n is equal to 12 so here n is
12 but C ends 52d and is 365 and what
we're doing here or what you can do is
you can now take this limit as n goes to
infinity so you keep increasing n higher
and higher and higher so instead of
being paid 1 365th every day for example
you could get paid your interest every
second maybe and there are 31 million
536,000 seconds
year so if you were to calculate for n
equals 31 million five or six six 60,000
you would still get to pound 71 so what
you're actually doing is you're getting
closer and closer to e
but we never get to two pounds 72 so the
limit as this goes to infinity is equal
to the number E which is two point seven
one eight I'm going to just cheat look
at my arm for the next number two point
seven more eight two eight one eight
carries on so as you increase n you get
closer and closer to this number but you
can never reach to pound 72 so the
numbers are increasing between C and D
but you just can't have a fraction of a
penny
so just stuck on that to pound 71 so the
persons of the game show you definitely
want adopted a okay right I think that's
probably enough of me talking but only
there's one final question I wanted to
do because this was another great
question which is a quick one so this
one was from Nikolas so Nikolas asked me
what is my favorite fraction so if
anyone else wants to share their
favorite fraction in the chat please do
but my favourite fraction is okay so my
favorite fraction is 3 divided by 2 to
the power of 9 quarters so this is my
favorite fraction at home you may be
wondering why this is my favorite
fraction so this is actually from my my
PhD research when I was looking at
rivers discharging into the ocean so
there is a number file video about this
called where does river wall
to go which I totally recommend you
should go and check out that will fill
you in on everything you need to know
but in short the idea is you you have a
coast and you have a river so this is
the land and you have the river and your
water is flowing out of your perimeter
and we want to know where does this go
where does this river water actually go
we in the ocean because there is a
pattern to this and I was trying to
understand this mathematically and
basically what happens is it comes in it
forms really big well bull and there it
flows along the coast so this is what
happens you can see this in real data so
I actually went on board a ship and
sailed around the ocean for six weeks
which is a very long time to be on the
ship I can tell you that okay and we're
studying this and we know we found data
that supported the models I saw this in
my experiment and so what I understand
was some of the properties of this
current that forms along the coast and
one of those properties is the velocity
of this current so the velocity of this
current this river water flowing along
the coast is equal to the rotation rate
times the density difference times the
amount of water leaving the river all
multiplied by three divided by two to
the nine courses so I did this sort of
went through this calculation in my
thesis which is on my website if you
want to check that out as well and so
derive this number through various
integrals and various formulas but this
tells you the speed of the river water
as it flows along the coast and this
number just happened to appear and so
that instantly became my favorite
fraction so that is my answer -
Nicholas's question so if any of you
have favorite fractions of the reason do
share them be fun I don't know if I've
ever been asked my favorite fraction
before so as soon as I thought about it
this is the obvious answer but you know
it's a interesting question
okay so I've gone through lots of
questions people sent in beforehand so I
guess I'm now happy if anyone else
currently watching wants to ask any
questions then let's go with that and
see what we can do so if you've got any
questions at all
ideally let's start with the percentages
decimals and fractions ones that would
be great but if there are other
questions there maybe we can do some of
those as well we'll see okay what is my
favorite proof oh there's a good
question ah favorite proof um favorite
proof would probably be hmm I'm trying
to think of what I can do off the top of
my head as well would be nice when there
okay so I'm gonna rub the board off
whilst I try and think about what my
favorite previous I tell it okay I've
got one for you okay I don't know if
this is my favorite proof because it's
not because it mainly because I'm not
sure it could necessarily be called a
proof because it's not super rigorous
but I'm gonna call it let's pretend it's
like a it's like a pseudo proof and it's
definitely my favorite one of those okay
so we're going to look at the following
sequence and this is relevance of
fractions because these are all
fractions so I can totally talk about
this during the percentages decimals and
fractions livestreams is very relevant
so what we want to do is we want to
calculate the value of this song now I'm
sure some of you will have seen this
before so if anyone wants to tell
everyone tell us all what the the answer
is and they're going to show you how to
prove that that is indeed the answer so
I'm just going to write the
sort of the symbol notation of
mathematical notation - this would be
the sum from N equals 1 to infinity of 1
over n so here you've got N equals 1
this 1 is N equals 2 this one is M
equals 3 etc etc ok it is not - 112 that
would be 1 plus 2 Plus 3 plus 4 plus 5
etc this is this is 1 over n rather than
just n okay we've got a favorite
fraction 1 6 ^ 1 6 love it that's a good
one francesco same as me it comes up in
your work that's nice
it's unfortunate ly not 2 so the one
that equals 2 would be if you do the sum
from N equals 1 to infinity of 1 over 2
CA and this is actually going to be
important so I'm glad you mentioned this
because this one is going to be 1 now
this one is a this is a geometric series
so we actually have a formula for this
so this has a common ratio which means
that you get between terms you just
multiply the last term by the next one
so to go from that term along you're
multiplying times 1/2 so your common
ratio is equal to 1/2 and your geometric
series formula tells you that the sum is
therefore equal to 1 over 1 minus R
which here is going to give you 2 well
I'll write out that last steps make it
more obvious so it's 1 over 1 minus R
which is 1 over 1 minus 1/2 is 1/2 so
this one is 2 from using our geometric
series formula but now the top one we
don't have a common ratio here there
isn't a number that you multiply by to
get from any term to the next one so to
get from this term to this term you
multiply by 1/2 but then if you multiply
1/2 by 1/2 you get the quarter you don't
get the 1/3 so there's no common ratio
between all of these terms so we can't
use the Oh metric series on this top one
so anyone have any ideas what the top
sequence sorry the top series is equal
to if we add it up forever so we've got
one suggestion of saying it's finite
which is actually unfortunately not true
it goes to infinity so this okay and one
way we can think about this is actually
using this or my proof and talk you
through as one of my favorites is using
this series here about one of the powers
of 1/2 so the proof goes as follows as I
said this is more of a pseudo proof this
is not super rigorous but it will give
you a feeling of what's happening so
right let's just know I can leave them
on the board I think ok so I want to do
is start off by comparing terms in each
of these sequences so we've got let's
think about this
this is 1 so half as quarter so what I
can say is
if I take the first term here the one
and then we compare this to let's say
this term in this second one a half so
one is definitely bigger than 1/2 so one
is bigger than 1/2 now this is a true
statement now if I go and take this term
Plus this one and maybe I should do this
in a different color so we can emphasize
they're going together so now I'm going
to take these two terms together so 1/2
plus 1/3 and I'm going to say that those
two together are bigger than two of
these are bigger than 1/4 plus 1/4 okay
so there's the you can either think of
it as comparing to the terms in this
sequence or you can think of it as
saying the next term along so we said
that a heart so he said that one is
bigger than 1/2 which is true and then
we've taken the next two terms and if
you replace each of those by a term
further along then because it's further
along in the sequence it's definitely
smaller so you replace each of those two
by 1/4 then you have 1/4 plus 1/4 and
you can check this is truly right so 1/4
2/4 is 1/2 and 1/2 plus 1/3 is bigger
than 1/2 it's like put 8 something 2.83
353 there you go five six so so this is
also true and now we're going to do the
same thing again do this in orange so
you need the same thing again with the
next
it's gonna be the next three for the
next four terms so we're going to have
one six one seven let me take those four
terms a quarter and if we replace each
of them by one eight then the left-hand
side is bigger because one eighth would
be the next term along so it's smaller
so this one is now okay and then we
carry on so this is the start of our
pattern and we're going to allow this to
sort of go forever so if you now add up
everything on the left-hand side of the
inequality so this is a 1 plus 1/2 plus
1/3 plus 1/4 or fifth or sixth the
seventh and keep going what we see is
that the left-hand side here is equal to
our sum is equal to one plus 1/2 plus
1/3 12 fifth sixth seventh forever and
we know that this is bigger than
everything on the right-hand side so the
right-hand side is equal to 1/2 plus 1/2
plus 1/8 plus 1/8 plus 1/8 plus 1/8 plus
another 1/2 and this is going to go on
forever so we've got an infinite number
of inequalities and for every inequality
the right-hand side is 1/2 so the
right-hand side is equal to or I should
say tends to 1/2 times infinite number
of times in some sense so what we've got
1/2 times infinity is of course infinity
so what we've shown here is that the
left-hand side is the sum we want to
cover
eight the right hand side is infinity
and the left is bigger than the right so
this our sum of 1 over n must be
infinity because it's bigger than
infinity so therefore it is a bit so I
wouldn't say it's a super rigorous proof
as I emphasize the beginning it's more
like a pseudo proof you know you need to
you would need to define a bit more like
what you meant by these limits and the
idea that you can take you know
inequalities forever so there's like
some levels of rigor that are needed to
make a formal mathematical proof but
it's my it's my favorite sort of pseudo
proof as I said that I can show you as
well off the top of my head so great
question ok right I've been going for 52
minutes I reckon I might as well do an
hour at this point so we can do one or
maybe two other questions so any other
questions you've got a few more minutes
to well drop them in the chat box I
think anything else was thrown in but
when I can do quite easily what we got
here what sort of range was the Reynolds
number of the river problem and so the
water in the river is going to be
turbulent so the Reynolds number would
be over a thousand so generally if the
Reynolds number is over a thousand then
that is pretty much turbulence it is
over three thousand is definitely
turbulence so orders of magnitude the
Reynolds numbers around one thousand in
the river problem because rivers
articulate basically Hannah and I saw
that as well in my experiments when I
was recreating the situation in the lab
I also had a Reynolds number which was
over a thousand definitely okay
okay so we've got do you know any proofs
for the sum of consecutive integers
being n square plus n over 2 sure do
that lets me talk about induction ok so
there's going to be our final question
then I'll wrap this up
whoops you can break my board eraser in
a second ok so a proof that was some of
the second of integers so we want to
prove that the sum of the integers K
when K is 1 to N which just emphasizes
equal to one plus three candy and we
want to prove that this is equal to yeah
if I went forever it would indeed be
minus 1 12 puzzle at home and we want to
know all we want to prove this is equal
to what we go a little bit and throw us
out okay so we're going to do this using
proof by induction so when you do proof
by induction is you show first of all
step one step one it's got the base case
so we show that this is true when for a
very very small case which is very easy
to calculate so let's consider
and being too for example so if we
consider Andy well I should do anything
while Jim that and being one so the sum
of the first one numbers is one those
wanting to just is one so we know that
the sum from N equals 1 to 1 K equals 1
to 1 okay is 1 and then our formula if
we plug in the values for n being 1
gives us 1 times 2 divided by 2 which is
1 so we get 1 is also 1 so that's a tip
they agrees while formula works for n
being 1 so our first case the base case
now step 2 in our proof by induction is
to say what are going so this is the
inductive hypothesis and this means we
assume that this formula is true up to
some number capital a so we up to and
what we want to prove now is assuming
it's true up to capital n can we prove
that it's also true for n plus 1 because
if we can do that then we know it's true
for 1 and therefore we've done a proof
in step 2 to say if it's true for 1 then
it's true for 2 and yes it was proved by
Gauss good knowledge so if it's no it's
true for 1 then we know it's 2 1 plus 1
which is 2 well then we know it's true
for 2 so we know it's true for 2 plus 1
which is 3 then we know it's true for 3
so it's true for 3 plus 1 which is 4 and
so we know it's true forever because we
just because of the step 2 so you have
to show it's true for the small case and
then you assume it's true up to some
improve using that that it's true 2n
plus 4 so what that means is we need to
now take our sum from k equals 1 to n
plus 1 of k right so we can write this
as 1 plus 2 plus 3 all the way up to
okay so I'd if we write them out like so
but now we've assumed that this is true
up to n so that means that our formula
is valid up to capital n so what we can
do is take these n numbers here
underlined in pink so that is equal to
the sum K equals 1 to capital M ok and
now by our inductive hypothesis we
assumed this was now true so this is
equal to our formula and 1 over 2 so
what were left with putting all of this
together is going to be n times n plus 1
and so now we can do some algebra so we
can factor out the endless 1/2 and now
we can do a final step of algebra which
is to multiply or take the factor of 1/2
outside so now we have a formula but
does this give us what we expect it to
give us so what we do is we go back to
here and say now what happens when
little and
is equal to big n plus one then we
substitute it in and it should give us
big n plus one and plus one plus one is
two over two and so the blue one here is
exactly what we've got in the pink down
the bottom so we can get that's a tick
and then our proof by induction is true
so just to recap the idea is we've shown
it's true for N equals one and then
we've done the inductive hypothesis in
step two which was saying if this is a
true statement
to some number capital n then we have
shown that it must be true for n plus
one so we know it's true for N equals
one so by step two is true for N equals
two go back step two if it's true for N
equals two it's not true for N equals
three it's now true for N equals four
it's not true for N equals five
it's now true forever and we have our
final proof of this formula okay good
question right so I've seen a couple
more questions I'm afraid I am out of
time I've got some University Teaching
to go and do now which is much less fun
for my actual university students but
thanks everyone for for joining a live
stream thank you submit your questions
and taking part in the chat I'm going to
be doing this every Friday at four
o'clock UK time so if that time is
really really bad because I'm not sure
exactly where you're all watching from
maybe you're not in the UK but if that
time is really bad then by all means
send me a message or send me a comment
and we can you know maybe we can figure
out another time or something I don't
mind doing that but for now I will be
back next week next Friday at 4 o'clock
4:00 p.m. UK time and we will be
focusing the discussion at least at the
beginning again I'll try and do the
first half an hour based on other
questions people have sent me which we
based on our net
GCSE maths video which will come out on
Monday so in three days time and that
video is about travel graphs so distance
time graphs and we have some fun trying
to work out Usain Bolt's distance time
graph so make sure you watch the video
on Monday and then send in any questions
that you have
and then Bobby and Suzanne will answer
them on Thursday that's the mass appeal
team and then I'll do my livestream
again next Friday at 4 o'clock okay fab
right so thank you very much everyone
and I'll see you soon